# Class 3

Today we did some more setup and learned about Python conditions: `if` and `else` statements.

## Lastpass

Everyone created a free PC account for [Lastpass](https://www.lastpass.com). It is very important that you use strong passwords for all websites, and that you use a different password for every website. Lastpass helps you create and remember your passwords.

Everyone made one strong and easy to remember password which is their Lastpass password. Then we installed the browser plugin and learned how to do three things:
- Put an account you already have into Lastpass.
- Log in using Lastpass.
- Create a new account using Lastpass to generate a strong random password.

## Notion

We all created an account for [Notion](https://www.notion.so). We will learn to use this for taking notes.

## If and else

Until now, the computer just ran all the code we wrote from top to bottom. But sometimes we want to choose which code to run. "If" something is true, we want to run some code, and "else" (if it is not true) we want to run different code. In Python, you do this using the python keywords `if` and `else`.

For the example program we wrote, we wanted to know if a number was the same as another number. Here is a very simple example:

```python
a = 3

if a == 7:
    print("a is seven!")
else:
    print("a is not seven...")
```

This program will print `a is not seven...` because `a` is not `7`: it is `3`.

Even from this simple example, we can learn some things:

- After the word `if` you write the thing you want to check. This is called the condition.
- After the condition there is a colon (`:`). After `else` there is also a colon.
- The line under the `if` statement must have spaces in front. The line under `else` as well.
- The condition is checking if two things are the same using two equals signs: `==`. You have to use two, because one equals sign means something else. More on this below.

### Double equals sign

Why do you have to use two equals signs to check if two things are the same? Because the single equals sign has a different meaning already. Let's look at two simple statements:

1. `a = 3`
2. `a == 3`

Number 1 means: "make `a` to be `3`". From now on, `a` is `3`. This is called "assignment", because we are assigning `a` the value `3`.
Number 2 means: "is `a` the same as `3`?" It is a question. When you are asking a question about things being the same, you always have to use `==`.

### Other things to check: conditions / comparisons

So if you want to know if `a` is `3`, you write `a == 3`. What if you want to know if `a` is not `3`? Or if `a` is larger than `3`? For that, you use the following symbols:

- `a == 3`: Is `a` `3`?
- `a != 3`: Is `a` not `3`?
- `a > 3`: Is `a` larger than `3`?
- `a < 3`: Is `a` smaller than `3`?
- `a >= 3`: Is `a` larger than or equal to `3`?
- `a <= 3`: Is `a` smaller than or equal to `3`?

All these statements are comparing two things using some symbols between the two things that are compared. Those symbols are called _comparison operators_.

### Spaces in front of lines: indentation

Why are there spaces in front of the lines underneath `if`? This is to let Python know which lines it should run `if` your condition is true. You can understand why you need to use these spaces, by looking at the next example:

```python
if a == 42:
    print("a is 42.")
    print("Such a nice number 42 is.")
    print("Let's go find some other numbers!")
print("I bet I can find more numbers than you can")
```

Looking at this code, which sentences should Python print if `a` is not `42`? It definitely should not print "a is 42". What about the other lines? You have to tell Python exactly which statements are part of the `if` suite and which are not. You do this using the spaces in front. These spaces are called _indentation_. All lines that have the same indentation are part of the same suite. So in this case, if `a` is not `42`, Python will skip the first three lines and only print the fourth one.

It does not matter how many spaces you use, as long as you always use the same amount. Most programmers use 4 spaces though, so let's just use 4 spaces!

## Number guessing game

In the class we wrote a number guessing game together. You can see the code in the [guess-number repository](https://github.com/positive-rate/guess-number/blob/master/main.py). While writing the code, we learned a couple of things:

- You can make a random number between -1 and 50 using `random.randint(-1, 50)`.
- "int" is short for "integer", which is a whole number.
- Before you can use `random`, you have to import it first, by putting `import random` at the top of your code file.
- You can stop the program using `exit()`.
- We get input from the user using `input()`. You can use `input` to ask a question as well: `input("Question?")`.
- The value you get back from `input` is a string. To make it an integer, put it inside `int()`, like this: `int(input())`.

We also learned it is a lot of annoying work to write the same code over and over again to ask the user the same question six times. Let's see if we can do something about that next week ;)